docs/routing.rst, before:

===========
URL Routing
===========

.. module:: werkzeug.routing

When it comes to combining multiple controller or view functions (however
you want to call them), you need a dispatcher.  A simple way would be
applying regular expression tests on ``PATH_INFO`` and call registered
callback functions that return the value.

Werkzeug provides a much more powerful system, similar to `Routes`_.  All the
objects mentioned on this page must be imported from :mod:`werkzeug.routing`, not
from :mod:`werkzeug`!

.. _Routes: https://routes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


Quickstart
==========

Here is a simple example which could be the URL definition for a blog::

    from werkzeug.routing import Map, Rule, NotFound, RequestRedirect

    url_map = Map([
        Rule('/', endpoint='blog/index'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/', endpoint='blog/archive'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/<int:month>/', endpoint='blog/archive'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/<int:month>/<int:day>/', endpoint='blog/archive'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/<int:month>/<int:day>/<slug>',
             endpoint='blog/show_post'),
        Rule('/about', endpoint='blog/about_me'),
        Rule('/feeds/', endpoint='blog/feeds'),
        Rule('/feeds/<feed_name>.rss', endpoint='blog/show_feed')
    ])

    def application(environ, start_response):
        urls = url_map.bind_to_environ(environ)
        try:
            endpoint, args = urls.match()
        except HTTPException, e:
            return e(environ, start_response)
        start_response('200 OK', [('Content-Type', 'text/plain')])
        return [f'Rule points to {endpoint!r} with arguments {args!r}'.encode()]

So what does that do?  First of all we create a new :class:`Map` which stores
a bunch of URL rules.  Then we pass it a list of :class:`Rule` objects.

Each :class:`Rule` object is instantiated with a string that represents a rule
and an endpoint which will be the alias for what view the rule represents.
Multiple rules can have the same endpoint, but should have different arguments
to allow URL construction.

The format for the URL rules is straightforward, but explained in detail below.

Inside the WSGI application we bind the url_map to the current request which will
return a new :class:`MapAdapter`.  This url_map adapter can then be used to match
or build domains for the current request.

The :meth:`MapAdapter.match` method can then either return a tuple in the form
``(endpoint, args)`` or raise one of the three exceptions
:exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.NotFound`, :exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.MethodNotAllowed`,
or :exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.RequestRedirect`.  For more details about those
exceptions have a look at the documentation of the :meth:`MapAdapter.match` method.


Rule Format
===========

Rule strings are URL paths with placeholders for variable parts in the
format ``<converter(arguments):name>``. ``converter`` and ``arguments``
(with parentheses) are optional. If no converter is given, the
``default`` converter is used (``string`` by default). The available
converters are discussed below.

Rules that end with a slash are "branches", others are "leaves". If
``strict_slashes`` is enabled (the default), visiting a branch URL
without a trailing slash will redirect to the URL with a slash appended.

Many HTTP servers merge consecutive slashes into one when receiving
requests. If ``merge_slashes`` is enabled (the default), rules will
merge slashes in non-variable parts when matching and building. Visiting
a URL with consecutive slashes will redirect to the URL with slashes
merged. If you want to disable ``merge_slashes`` for a :class:`Rule` or
:class:`Map`, you'll also need to configure your web server
appropriately.


Built-in Converters
===================

Converters for common types of URL variables are built-in. The available
converters can be overridden or extended through :attr:`Map.converters`.

.. autoclass:: UnicodeConverter

.. autoclass:: PathConverter

.. autoclass:: AnyConverter

.. autoclass:: IntegerConverter

.. autoclass:: FloatConverter

.. autoclass:: UUIDConverter

If a custom converter can match a forward slash, ``/``, it should have
the attribute ``part_isolating`` set to ``False``. This will ensure
that rules using the custom converter are correctly matched.


Maps, Rules and Adapters
========================

.. autoclass:: Map
   :members:

   .. attribute:: converters

      The dictionary of converters.  This can be modified after the class
      was created, but will only affect rules added after the
      modification.  If the rules are defined with the list passed to the
      class, the `converters` parameter to the constructor has to be used
      instead.

.. autoclass:: MapAdapter
   :members:

.. autoclass:: Rule
   :members: empty


Matchers
========

.. autoclass:: StateMachineMatcher
   :members:


Rule Factories
==============

.. autoclass:: RuleFactory
   :members: get_rules

.. autoclass:: Subdomain

.. autoclass:: Submount

.. autoclass:: EndpointPrefix


Rule Templates
==============

.. autoclass:: RuleTemplate


Custom Converters
=================

You can add custom converters that add behaviors not provided by the
built-in converters. To make a custom converter, subclass
:class:`BaseConverter` then pass the new class to the :class:`Map`
``converters`` parameter, or add it to
:attr:`url_map.converters <Map.converters>`.

The converter should have a ``regex`` attribute with a regular
expression to match with. If the converter can take arguments in a URL
rule, it should accept them in its ``__init__`` method.

It can implement a ``to_python`` method to convert the matched string to
some other object. This can also do extra validation that wasn't
possible with the ``regex`` attribute, and should raise a
:exc:`werkzeug.routing.ValidationError` in that case. Raising any other
errors will cause a 500 error.

It can implement a ``to_url`` method to convert a Python object to a
string when building a URL. Any error raised here will be converted to a
:exc:`werkzeug.routing.BuildError` and eventually cause a 500 error.

This example implements a ``BooleanConverter`` that will match the
strings ``"yes"``, ``"no"``, and ``"maybe"``, returning a random value
for ``"maybe"``. ::

    from random import randrange
    from werkzeug.routing import BaseConverter, ValidationError

    class BooleanConverter(BaseConverter):
        regex = r"(?:yes|no|maybe)"

        def __init__(self, url_map, maybe=False):
            super().__init__(url_map)
            self.maybe = maybe

        def to_python(self, value):
            if value == "maybe":
                if self.maybe:
                    return not randrange(2)
                raise ValidationError
            return value == 'yes'

        def to_url(self, value):
            return "yes" if value else "no"

    from werkzeug.routing import Map, Rule

    url_map = Map([
        Rule("/vote/<bool:werkzeug_rocks>", endpoint="vote"),
        Rule("/guess/<bool(maybe=True):foo>", endpoint="guess")
    ], converters={'bool': BooleanConverter})

If you want to change the default converter, assign a different
converter to the ``"default"`` key.


Host Matching
=============

.. versionadded:: 0.7

Starting with Werkzeug 0.7 it's also possible to do matching on the whole
host names instead of just the subdomain.  To enable this feature you need
to pass ``host_matching=True`` to the :class:`Map` constructor and provide
the `host` argument to all routes::

    url_map = Map([
        Rule('/', endpoint='www_index', host='www.example.com'),
        Rule('/', endpoint='help_index', host='help.example.com')
    ], host_matching=True)

Variable parts are of course also possible in the host section::

    url_map = Map([
        Rule('/', endpoint='www_index', host='www.example.com'),
        Rule('/', endpoint='user_index', host='<user>.example.com')
    ], host_matching=True)


WebSockets
==========

.. versionadded:: 1.0

If a :class:`Rule` is created with ``websocket=True``, it will only
match if the :class:`Map` is bound to a request with a ``url_scheme`` of
``ws`` or ``wss``.

.. note::

   Werkzeug has no further WebSocket support beyond routing. This
   functionality is mostly of use to ASGI projects.

.. code-block:: python

    url_map = Map([
        Rule("/ws", endpoint="comm", websocket=True),
    ])
    adapter = map.bind("example.org", "/ws", url_scheme="ws")
    assert adapter.match() == ("comm", {})

If the only match is a WebSocket rule and the bind is HTTP (or the
only match is HTTP and the bind is WebSocket) a
:exc:`WebsocketMismatch` (derives from
:exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.BadRequest`) exception is raised.

As WebSocket URLs have a different scheme, rules are always built with a
scheme and host, ``force_external=True`` is implied.

.. code-block:: python

    url = adapter.build("comm")
    assert url == "ws://example.org/ws"


State Machine Matching
======================

The default matching algorithm uses a state machine that transitions
between parts of the request path to find a match. To understand how
this works consider this rule::

    /resource/<id>

Firstly this rule is decomposed into two ``RulePart``. The first is a
static part with a content equal to ``resource``, the second is
dynamic and requires a regex match to ``[^/]+``.

A state machine is then created with an initial state that represents
the rule's first ``/``. This initial state has a single, static
transition to the next state which represents the rule's second
``/``. This second state has a single dynamic transition to the final
state which includes the rule.

To match a path the matcher starts and the initial state and follows
transitions that work. Clearly a trial path of ``/resource/2`` has the
parts ``""``, ``resource``, and ``2`` which match the transitions and
hence a rule will match. Whereas ``/other/2`` will not match as there
is no transition for the ``other`` part from the initial state.

The only diversion from this rule is if a ``RulePart`` is not
part-isolating i.e. it will match ``/``. In this case the ``RulePart``
is considered final and represents a transition that must include all
the subsequent parts of the trial path.

Commit message:

Minor update to the routing converter docs
This should clarify that the regex itself is matched as a group and
hence discourage gropuing within. See also #2481.

docs/routing.rst, after:

===========
URL Routing
===========

.. module:: werkzeug.routing

When it comes to combining multiple controller or view functions (however
you want to call them), you need a dispatcher.  A simple way would be
applying regular expression tests on ``PATH_INFO`` and call registered
callback functions that return the value.

Werkzeug provides a much more powerful system, similar to `Routes`_.  All the
objects mentioned on this page must be imported from :mod:`werkzeug.routing`, not
from :mod:`werkzeug`!

.. _Routes: https://routes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/


Quickstart
==========

Here is a simple example which could be the URL definition for a blog::

    from werkzeug.routing import Map, Rule, NotFound, RequestRedirect

    url_map = Map([
        Rule('/', endpoint='blog/index'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/', endpoint='blog/archive'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/<int:month>/', endpoint='blog/archive'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/<int:month>/<int:day>/', endpoint='blog/archive'),
        Rule('/<int:year>/<int:month>/<int:day>/<slug>',
             endpoint='blog/show_post'),
        Rule('/about', endpoint='blog/about_me'),
        Rule('/feeds/', endpoint='blog/feeds'),
        Rule('/feeds/<feed_name>.rss', endpoint='blog/show_feed')
    ])

    def application(environ, start_response):
        urls = url_map.bind_to_environ(environ)
        try:
            endpoint, args = urls.match()
        except HTTPException, e:
            return e(environ, start_response)
        start_response('200 OK', [('Content-Type', 'text/plain')])
        return [f'Rule points to {endpoint!r} with arguments {args!r}'.encode()]

So what does that do?  First of all we create a new :class:`Map` which stores
a bunch of URL rules.  Then we pass it a list of :class:`Rule` objects.

Each :class:`Rule` object is instantiated with a string that represents a rule
and an endpoint which will be the alias for what view the rule represents.
Multiple rules can have the same endpoint, but should have different arguments
to allow URL construction.

The format for the URL rules is straightforward, but explained in detail below.

Inside the WSGI application we bind the url_map to the current request which will
return a new :class:`MapAdapter`.  This url_map adapter can then be used to match
or build domains for the current request.

The :meth:`MapAdapter.match` method can then either return a tuple in the form
``(endpoint, args)`` or raise one of the three exceptions
:exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.NotFound`, :exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.MethodNotAllowed`,
or :exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.RequestRedirect`.  For more details about those
exceptions have a look at the documentation of the :meth:`MapAdapter.match` method.


Rule Format
===========

Rule strings are URL paths with placeholders for variable parts in the
format ``<converter(arguments):name>``. ``converter`` and ``arguments``
(with parentheses) are optional. If no converter is given, the
``default`` converter is used (``string`` by default). The available
converters are discussed below.

Rules that end with a slash are "branches", others are "leaves". If
``strict_slashes`` is enabled (the default), visiting a branch URL
without a trailing slash will redirect to the URL with a slash appended.

Many HTTP servers merge consecutive slashes into one when receiving
requests. If ``merge_slashes`` is enabled (the default), rules will
merge slashes in non-variable parts when matching and building. Visiting
a URL with consecutive slashes will redirect to the URL with slashes
merged. If you want to disable ``merge_slashes`` for a :class:`Rule` or
:class:`Map`, you'll also need to configure your web server
appropriately.


Built-in Converters
===================

Converters for common types of URL variables are built-in. The available
converters can be overridden or extended through :attr:`Map.converters`.

.. autoclass:: UnicodeConverter

.. autoclass:: PathConverter

.. autoclass:: AnyConverter

.. autoclass:: IntegerConverter

.. autoclass:: FloatConverter

.. autoclass:: UUIDConverter


Maps, Rules and Adapters
========================

.. autoclass:: Map
   :members:

   .. attribute:: converters

      The dictionary of converters.  This can be modified after the class
      was created, but will only affect rules added after the
      modification.  If the rules are defined with the list passed to the
      class, the `converters` parameter to the constructor has to be used
      instead.

.. autoclass:: MapAdapter
   :members:

.. autoclass:: Rule
   :members: empty


Matchers
========

.. autoclass:: StateMachineMatcher
   :members:


Rule Factories
==============

.. autoclass:: RuleFactory
   :members: get_rules

.. autoclass:: Subdomain

.. autoclass:: Submount

.. autoclass:: EndpointPrefix


Rule Templates
==============

.. autoclass:: RuleTemplate


Custom Converters
=================

You can add custom converters that add behaviors not provided by the
built-in converters. To make a custom converter, subclass
:class:`BaseConverter` then pass the new class to the :class:`Map`
``converters`` parameter, or add it to
:attr:`url_map.converters <Map.converters>`.

The converter should have a ``regex`` attribute with a regular
expression to match with. If the converter can take arguments in a URL
rule, it should accept them in its ``__init__`` method. The entire
regex expression will be matched as a group and used as the value for
conversion.

If a custom converter can match a forward slash, ``/``, it should have
the attribute ``part_isolating`` set to ``False``. This will ensure
that rules using the custom converter are correctly matched.

It can implement a ``to_python`` method to convert the matched string to
some other object. This can also do extra validation that wasn't
possible with the ``regex`` attribute, and should raise a
:exc:`werkzeug.routing.ValidationError` in that case. Raising any other
errors will cause a 500 error.

It can implement a ``to_url`` method to convert a Python object to a
string when building a URL. Any error raised here will be converted to a
:exc:`werkzeug.routing.BuildError` and eventually cause a 500 error.

This example implements a ``BooleanConverter`` that will match the
strings ``"yes"``, ``"no"``, and ``"maybe"``, returning a random value
for ``"maybe"``. ::

    from random import randrange
    from werkzeug.routing import BaseConverter, ValidationError

    class BooleanConverter(BaseConverter):
        regex = r"(?:yes|no|maybe)"

        def __init__(self, url_map, maybe=False):
            super().__init__(url_map)
            self.maybe = maybe

        def to_python(self, value):
            if value == "maybe":
                if self.maybe:
                    return not randrange(2)
                raise ValidationError
            return value == 'yes'

        def to_url(self, value):
            return "yes" if value else "no"

    from werkzeug.routing import Map, Rule

    url_map = Map([
        Rule("/vote/<bool:werkzeug_rocks>", endpoint="vote"),
        Rule("/guess/<bool(maybe=True):foo>", endpoint="guess")
    ], converters={'bool': BooleanConverter})

If you want to change the default converter, assign a different
converter to the ``"default"`` key.


Host Matching
=============

.. versionadded:: 0.7

Starting with Werkzeug 0.7 it's also possible to do matching on the whole
host names instead of just the subdomain.  To enable this feature you need
to pass ``host_matching=True`` to the :class:`Map` constructor and provide
the `host` argument to all routes::

    url_map = Map([
        Rule('/', endpoint='www_index', host='www.example.com'),
        Rule('/', endpoint='help_index', host='help.example.com')
    ], host_matching=True)

Variable parts are of course also possible in the host section::

    url_map = Map([
        Rule('/', endpoint='www_index', host='www.example.com'),
        Rule('/', endpoint='user_index', host='<user>.example.com')
    ], host_matching=True)


WebSockets
==========

.. versionadded:: 1.0

If a :class:`Rule` is created with ``websocket=True``, it will only
match if the :class:`Map` is bound to a request with a ``url_scheme`` of
``ws`` or ``wss``.

.. note::

   Werkzeug has no further WebSocket support beyond routing. This
   functionality is mostly of use to ASGI projects.

.. code-block:: python

    url_map = Map([
        Rule("/ws", endpoint="comm", websocket=True),
    ])
    adapter = map.bind("example.org", "/ws", url_scheme="ws")
    assert adapter.match() == ("comm", {})

If the only match is a WebSocket rule and the bind is HTTP (or the
only match is HTTP and the bind is WebSocket) a
:exc:`WebsocketMismatch` (derives from
:exc:`~werkzeug.exceptions.BadRequest`) exception is raised.

As WebSocket URLs have a different scheme, rules are always built with a
scheme and host, ``force_external=True`` is implied.

.. code-block:: python

    url = adapter.build("comm")
    assert url == "ws://example.org/ws"


State Machine Matching
======================

The default matching algorithm uses a state machine that transitions
between parts of the request path to find a match. To understand how
this works consider this rule::

    /resource/<id>

Firstly this rule is decomposed into two ``RulePart``. The first is a
static part with a content equal to ``resource``, the second is
dynamic and requires a regex match to ``[^/]+``.

A state machine is then created with an initial state that represents
the rule's first ``/``. This initial state has a single, static
transition to the next state which represents the rule's second
``/``. This second state has a single dynamic transition to the final
state which includes the rule.

To match a path the matcher starts and the initial state and follows
transitions that work. Clearly a trial path of ``/resource/2`` has the
parts ``""``, ``resource``, and ``2`` which match the transitions and
hence a rule will match. Whereas ``/other/2`` will not match as there
is no transition for the ``other`` part from the initial state.

The only diversion from this rule is if a ``RulePart`` is not
part-isolating i.e. it will match ``/``. In this case the ``RulePart``
is considered final and represents a transition that must include all
the subsequent parts of the trial path.
